article/your_article_name.md, before:

---
Title: "This is the title"
Author:
  - name: Rafael Neto Henriques
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Ariel Rokem
    affiliation: 2
Address:
  - code:    1
    address: MRC, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK
  - code:    2
    address: Affiliation Dept/Program/Center, Institution Name, City, State, Country
Contact:
  - rafaelnh21@gmail.com
Editor:
  - Name Surname
Reviewer:
  - Name Surname
  - Name Surname
Publication:
  received:  Sep,  1, 2015
  accepted:  Sep, 1, 2015
  published: Sep, 1, 2015
  volume:    "**1**"
  issue:     "**1**"
  date:      Sep 2015
Repository:
  article:   "http://github.com/rescience/rescience-submission/article"
  code:      "http://github.com/rescience/rescience-submission/code"
  data:      
  notebook:  
Reproduction:
  - "Original article (title, authors, journal, doi)"
Bibliography:
  your_article_name.bib

---

# Introduction

The introduction should introduce the original paper and put it in context
(e.g. is it an important paper in the domain ?). You must also specify if there
was an implementation available somewhere and provide a link to it if relevant
(and in such a case, you have to specify if the proposed replication is based
on this original implementation). You should also introduce your implementation
by listing language, tools, libraries, etc. and motivate choices if relevant.

Diffusion-weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DWI) is a non-invasive biomedical
imaging technique that allows us to infer properties of brain tissue
microstructures in vivo. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), one of the most
commonly used DWI techniques, models anisotropy diffusion of tissues using a
second-order tensor known as diffusion tensor (DT) [@Basser1994-zd, @Basser1994-hg]. DTI-based measures such as the fractional anisotropy (FA) are
normally used as an indicator of white matter coherence. However, these measures
are not always specific to one particular type of tissue. For example, diffusion
anisotropy in regions near the cerebral ventricle and parenchyma can be
underestimated by partial volume effects of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). To
remove the influence of this free water diffusion contamination, the DTI model
can be expanded to take into account two compartments representing the diffusion
contributions from the tissue and from the CSF. Recently, two procedures were
proposed by Hoy and colleagues [@Hoy2014-lk,] to fit the free water elimination of
DWI data acquired with two or more diffusion gradient-weightings [1]. Although
the authors mentioned that their algorithm were implemented "by a group member
with no formal programming training and without optimization for speed", their
evaluation tests showed that their procedures are able to provide diffusion
based measures stable to different free water contamination degree. In this
work, the two algorithms described by Hoy and colleagues are reviewed, optimized
and tested using monte-carlo simulations. Our goal is to provide the first
reference implementation of the procedures to fit the free water contamination
model optimized for both speed and robustness.

# Methods

The methods section should explain how you replicated the original results:

* did you use paper description
* did you contact authors ?
* did you use original sources ?
* did you modify some parts ?
* etc.

If relevevant in your domain, you should also provide a new standardized
description of the work.

## Procedures Implementation

The two procedures to fit the free water elimination DTI model were implemented
in python. Since no source implementation was previously provided by Hoy and
colleagues, all formulas of the original paper were carefully review.

**The Weighted-Linear Least Square Solution (WLS).** Two typos were found
on the formulas of the first proposed algorithm. First, the free-water adjusted
diffusion-weighted signal formula (original article's Methods subsection
"FWE-DTI") should be written as:

$$y_{ik} = \ln\left\{ \frac{s_i - s_0 f_k\exp(-bD_{iso})}{(1-f_k)} \right \}$$

Second, according to the general linear least squares solution [@Jones2010-pg],
the weighted linear least square solution of the free-water elimination model's
matrix solution should be given as:

$$\gamma = (W^TS^2W)^{-1}W^{T}S^{2}y$$

Moreover, to insure that the WLS method convergences to the local minima,
on the second and third iteration to refine the precision, the water
contamination volume fraction were resampled with steps sizes of 0.1 and 0.01
instead of the step sizes of 0.05 and 0.005 suggested by Hoy and Colleges.

**Non-Linear Least Square Solution (NLS)**. For the non-linear convergence
procedure, as suggested by Hoy and Colleges [1], the model parameters initial
guess were adjusted to the values estimated from the WLS approach. For computing
speed optiminzation, instead of using the modified Newton's method approach
proposed in the original article, the non-linear covergence was followed using
the wrapped modified levenberg-marquardt algorithm available at Python's
open-source software for mathematics, science, and engineering
(function scipy.optimize.leastsq of Scipy http://scipy.org/). To constrain the
models parameters to plausibe range, the free water volume fraction $f$ was
converted to $f_t = \arcsin (2f-1) + \pi / 2$. To compare the robustness of the
techniques with and without this constrains, the free water volume fraction
transformation was implemented as an optional function feature. In addition to
the scipy.optimize.leastsq, the more recent Scipy's optimization function
scipy.optimize.least_square (available in Scipy's version 0.17) was also tested.
This allows solving the non-linear problems directly bounded with predefined
constrains, however for the free water elimination model this did not show to
overcome the robustness and time speed of the procedure scipy.optimize.leastsq
when the proposed f transformation was used (see supplementary_notebook.ipynb
for more details). To speed the non-linear performance, the free water
elimination DTI model jacobian was analytically derived and incorporated to the
non-linear procedure (for the details of the jacobian derivation see
supplementary_material.md). As an expansion of the work done by Hoy and
colleagues, we also allow users to use of Cholesky decomposition of the
diffusion tensor to insure that this is a positive defined tensor
[@Koay2006-zo]. Due to the increase of the model's mathematical complexity when
the Cholesky decomposition is used, this cannot be used when the analytical
Jacobian derivation is selected.

**Implemtation Dependencies**. In addition to the Scipy's dependencies, both
free water elimination fitting procedures requires modules from the open source
software project Diffusion Imaging (Dipy, http://nipy.org/dipy/,  [@Garyfallidis2012-zp]) since these contain all necessary standard diffusion
tensor processing functions. Although, the core algorithms of the free water
elimination procedures were implemented separately from Dipy, in the near
future, they will be incorporated as a Dipy's model reconstruction module
(https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/835). Our model fit functions also requires
the python pakage NumPy (http://www.numpy.org/).

### 2.2 Simulations
In this study, the Hoy and colleagues simulations for the methods optimal
acquisition parameters are reproduces (i.e. simulations along 32 diffusion
direction for b-values 500 and 1500 s.mm^{-2} and with six b-value=0 images).
The monte carlos simulations are performed using the multi-tensor simulation
module available in Dipy. As the original article, fitting procedures are
tested for voxels with 5 different FA values and with constant diffusion trace
of $2.4 \times 10^{-3} mm^{2}.s^{-1}$. The eigenvalues used for the 5 FA levels
are reported in Table 1.

Table 1: Eigenvalues values used for the simulations of the study

FA            0                      0.11                   0.22                   0.3                    0.71
------------ ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ----------------------
$\lambda_1$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $9.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $1.00 \times 10^{-3}$  $1.08 \times 10^{-3}$  $1.60 \times 10^{-3}$
$\lambda_2$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.63 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.25 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.95 \times 10^{-4}$  $5.00 \times 10^{-4}$
$\lambda_3$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.38 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.75 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.25 \times 10^{-4}$  $3.00 \times 10^{-4}$


For each FA value, eleven different degrees of free water contamination were
evaluated (f values equaly spaced from 0 to 1). To access the robustness of the
procedure, Rician noise with a SNR of 40 relative to the b-value = 0 images was
used. For each FA and f-value pair, simulations were performed for 120
different  diffusion tensor orientation. Simulations for each diffusion tensor
orientation were repeated 100 times making a total of 12000 simulation
iterations for each FA and f-value pair.

# Results

Results should be compared with original results and you have to explain why
you think they are the same or why they may differ (qualitative result vs
quantitative result). Note that it is not necessary to redo all the original
analysis of the results.



# Conclusion

Conclusion, at the very minimum, should indicate very clearly if you were able
to replicate original results. If it was not possible but you found the reason
why (error in the original results), you should exlain it.

Despite the changes done to improve the algorithms speed performance, the
implemented procedures to solve the free water elimination DTI model show to
have identical performance to the original methods described by Hoy and
Colleagues [@Hoy2014-lk]. Ours results confirmed that the free water elimination
DTI model can be used to remove confounding effects of fast diffusion on the
brain, particulary for images voxels associated with high fractional anisotropy
values. Regarding to the problematic cases of voxels with high free water volume
fraction, we confirmed that this could be easly identified based on the free
water volume fraction estimates provided by the implemented model and eventually
removed.

Heading 1                          Heading 2
---------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
cell1 row1 cell2 row 1 cell3 row 1 cell4 row 1 cell5 row 1 cell6 row 1
cell1 row2 cell2 row 2 cell3 row 2 cell4 row 2 cell5 row 2 cell6 row 2
cell1 row3 cell2 row 3 cell3 row 3 cell4 row 3 cell5 row 3 cell6 row 3
---------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

Table: Table caption {#tbl:table}

A reference to table @tbl:table.
A reference to figure @fig:logo.
A reference to equation @eq:1.
A reference to citation @markdown.

![Figure caption](rescience-logo.pdf) {#fig:logo}

$$ A = \sqrt{\frac{B}{C}} $$ {#eq:1}


# References

Commit message:

add implementation dependencies in your_article_name

article/your_article_name.md, after:

---
Title: "This is the title"
Author:
  - name: Rafael Neto Henriques
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Ariel Rokem
    affiliation: 2
Address:
  - code:    1
    address: MRC, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, UK
  - code:    2
    address: Affiliation Dept/Program/Center, Institution Name, City, State, Country
Contact:
  - rafaelnh21@gmail.com
Editor:
  - Name Surname
Reviewer:
  - Name Surname
  - Name Surname
Publication:
  received:  Sep,  1, 2015
  accepted:  Sep, 1, 2015
  published: Sep, 1, 2015
  volume:    "**1**"
  issue:     "**1**"
  date:      Sep 2015
Repository:
  article:   "http://github.com/rescience/rescience-submission/article"
  code:      "http://github.com/rescience/rescience-submission/code"
  data:      
  notebook:  
Reproduction:
  - "Original article (title, authors, journal, doi)"
Bibliography:
  your_article_name.bib

---

# Introduction

The introduction should introduce the original paper and put it in context
(e.g. is it an important paper in the domain ?). You must also specify if there
was an implementation available somewhere and provide a link to it if relevant
(and in such a case, you have to specify if the proposed replication is based
on this original implementation). You should also introduce your implementation
by listing language, tools, libraries, etc. and motivate choices if relevant.

Diffusion-weighted Magnetic Resonance Imaging (DWI) is a non-invasive biomedical
imaging technique that allows us to infer properties of brain tissue
microstructures in vivo. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), one of the most
commonly used DWI techniques, models anisotropy diffusion of tissues using a
second-order tensor known as diffusion tensor (DT) [@Basser1994-zd, @Basser1994-hg].
DTI-based measures such as the fractional anisotropy (FA) are
normally used as an indicator of white matter coherence. However, these measures
are not always specific to one particular type of tissue. For example, diffusion
anisotropy in regions near the cerebral ventricle and parenchyma can be
underestimated by partial volume effects of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF). To
remove the influence of this free water diffusion contamination, the DTI model
can be expanded to take into account two compartments representing the diffusion
contributions from the tissue and from the CSF. Recently, two procedures were
proposed by Hoy and colleagues to fit the free water elimination of
DWI data acquired with two or more diffusion gradient-weightings [@Hoy2014-lk,]. Although
the authors mentioned that their algorithm were implemented "by a group member
with no formal programming training and without optimization for speed", their
evaluation tests showed that their procedures are able to provide diffusion
based measures stable to different free water contamination degree. In this
work, the two algorithms described by Hoy and colleagues are reviewed, optimized
and tested using monte-carlo simulations. Our goal is to provide the first
reference implementation of the procedures to fit the free water contamination
model optimized for both speed and robustness.

# Methods

The methods section should explain how you replicated the original results:

* did you use paper description
* did you contact authors ?
* did you use original sources ?
* did you modify some parts ?
* etc.

If relevevant in your domain, you should also provide a new standardized
description of the work.

## Procedures Implementation

The two procedures to fit the free water elimination DTI model were implemented
in python. Since no source implementation was previously provided by Hoy and
colleagues, all formulas of the original paper were carefully review.

**The Weighted-Linear Least Square Solution (WLS).** Two typos were found
on the formulas of the first proposed algorithm. First, the free-water adjusted
diffusion-weighted signal formula (original article's Methods subsection
"FWE-DTI") should be written as:

$$y_{ik} = \ln\left\{ \frac{s_i - s_0 f_k\exp(-bD_{iso})}{(1-f_k)} \right \}$$

Second, according to the general linear least squares solution [@Jones2010-pg],
the weighted linear least square solution of the free-water elimination model's
matrix solution should be given as:

$$\gamma = (W^TS^2W)^{-1}W^{T}S^{2}y$$

Moreover, to insure that the WLS method convergences to the local minima,
on the second and third iteration to refine the precision, the water
contamination volume fraction were resampled with steps sizes of 0.1 and 0.01
instead of the step sizes of 0.05 and 0.005 suggested by Hoy and Colleges.

**Non-Linear Least Square Solution (NLS)**. For the non-linear convergence
procedure, as suggested by Hoy and Colleges [@Hoy2014-lk,], the model parameters initial
guess were adjusted to the values estimated from the WLS approach. For computing
speed optiminzation, instead of using the modified Newton's method approach
proposed in the original article, the non-linear covergence was followed using
the wrapped modified levenberg-marquardt algorithm available at Python's
open-source software for mathematics, science, and engineering
(function scipy.optimize.leastsq of Scipy http://scipy.org/). To constrain the
models parameters to plausibe range, the free water volume fraction $f$ was
converted to $f_t = \arcsin (2f-1) + \pi / 2$. To compare the robustness of the
techniques with and without this constrains, the free water volume fraction
transformation was implemented as an optional function feature. In addition to
the scipy.optimize.leastsq, the more recent Scipy's optimization function
scipy.optimize.least_square (available in Scipy's version 0.17) was also tested.
This allows solving the non-linear problems directly bounded with predefined
constrains, however for the free water elimination model this did not show to
overcome the robustness and time speed of the procedure scipy.optimize.leastsq
when the proposed f transformation was used (see supplementary_notebook.ipynb
for more details). To speed the non-linear performance, the free water
elimination DTI model jacobian was analytically derived and incorporated to the
non-linear procedure (for the details of the jacobian derivation see
supplementary_material.md). As an expansion of the work done by Hoy and
colleagues, we also allow users to use of Cholesky decomposition of the
diffusion tensor to insure that this is a positive defined tensor
[@Koay2006-zo]. Due to the increase of the model's mathematical complexity when
the Cholesky decomposition is used, this cannot be used when the analytical
Jacobian derivation is selected.

**Removing problematic estimates**

For cases that the ground truth free water volume fraction is one (i.e. voxels
containing only free water), the tissue's diffusion tensor can fully represent
the diffusion signal which erratically induce estimates of the water volume 
fraction near to one. To remove this problematic cases, for all voxels with
standard DTI's mean diffusivity values larger than 2.7 mm^{2}.s^{-1}, the free
water volume fraction is set to one while all tissue's diffusion tensor
parameters are set to zero. This mean diffusivity threshold was adjusted to 90%
of the theoretical free water diffusion value, however this can be adjusted by
changing the optional input 'mdreg' in both WLS and NLS free water elimination
procedures.

**Implementation Dependencies**. In addition to the Scipy's dependencies, both
free water elimination fitting procedures requires modules from the open source
software project Diffusion Imaging (Dipy, http://nipy.org/dipy/,  [@Garyfallidis2012-zp]) 
since these contain all necessary standard diffusion tensor processing functions.
Although, the core algorithms of the free water elimination procedures were
implemented separately from Dipy, in the near future, they will be incorporated
as a Dipy's model reconstruction module (https://github.com/nipy/dipy/pull/835).
Our functions also requires the python pakage NumPy (http://www.numpy.org/).

### 2.2 Simulations
In this study, the Hoy and colleagues simulations for the methods optimal
acquisition parameters are reproduces (i.e. simulations along 32 diffusion
direction for b-values 500 and 1500 s.mm^{-2} and with six b-value=0 images).
The monte carlos simulations are performed using the multi-tensor simulation
module available in Dipy. As the original article, fitting procedures are
tested for voxels with 5 different FA values and with constant diffusion trace
of $2.4 \times 10^{-3} mm^{2}.s^{-1}$. The eigenvalues used for the 5 FA levels
are reported in Table 1.

Table 1: Eigenvalues values used for the simulations of the study

FA            0                      0.11                   0.22                   0.3                    0.71
------------ ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------- ----------------------
$\lambda_1$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $9.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $1.00 \times 10^{-3}$  $1.08 \times 10^{-3}$  $1.60 \times 10^{-3}$
$\lambda_2$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.63 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.25 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.95 \times 10^{-4}$  $5.00 \times 10^{-4}$
$\lambda_3$  $8.00 \times 10^{-4}$  $7.38 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.75 \times 10^{-4}$  $6.25 \times 10^{-4}$  $3.00 \times 10^{-4}$


For each FA value, eleven different degrees of free water contamination were
evaluated (f values equaly spaced from 0 to 1). To access the robustness of the
procedure, Rician noise with a SNR of 40 relative to the b-value = 0 images was
used. For each FA and f-value pair, simulations were performed for 120
different  diffusion tensor orientation. Simulations for each diffusion tensor
orientation were repeated 100 times making a total of 12000 simulation
iterations for each FA and f-value pair.

# Results

Results should be compared with original results and you have to explain why
you think they are the same or why they may differ (qualitative result vs
quantitative result). Note that it is not necessary to redo all the original
analysis of the results.



# Conclusion

Conclusion, at the very minimum, should indicate very clearly if you were able
to replicate original results. If it was not possible but you found the reason
why (error in the original results), you should exlain it.

Despite the changes done to improve the algorithms speed performance, the
implemented procedures to solve the free water elimination DTI model show to
have identical performance to the original methods described by Hoy and
Colleagues [@Hoy2014-lk]. Ours results confirmed that the free water elimination
DTI model can be used to remove confounding effects of fast diffusion on the
brain, particulary for images voxels associated with high fractional anisotropy
values. Regarding to the problematic cases of voxels with high free water volume
fraction, we confirmed that this could be easly identified based on the free
water volume fraction estimates provided by the implemented model and eventually
removed.

Heading 1                          Heading 2
---------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------
cell1 row1 cell2 row 1 cell3 row 1 cell4 row 1 cell5 row 1 cell6 row 1
cell1 row2 cell2 row 2 cell3 row 2 cell4 row 2 cell5 row 2 cell6 row 2
cell1 row3 cell2 row 3 cell3 row 3 cell4 row 3 cell5 row 3 cell6 row 3
---------- ----------- ----------- ----------- ----------- -----------

Table: Table caption {#tbl:table}

A reference to table @tbl:table.
A reference to figure @fig:logo.
A reference to equation @eq:1.
A reference to citation @markdown.

![Figure caption](rescience-logo.pdf) {#fig:logo}

$$ A = \sqrt{\frac{B}{C}} $$ {#eq:1}


# References
